ATHER CRISTOFORO arrived with the air
of a good general, who having lost an important battle, without any fault on his part,-
distressed, but not discouraged ; thoughtful,
but not confounded ; retreating, but not put
to flight ; turns his steps where necessity calls for his
presence, fortifying threatened quarters, regulating his
troops, and giving new orders.
' Peace be with you ! ' said he, as he entered. ' There
is nothing to hope from man ; you have therefore more
need to trust in God, and I have already had a pledge of
His protection.'
Although none of the party had anticipated much from
Father Cristoforo's attempt, (since, to see a powerful
nobleman desist from an act of oppression, unless he were
overcome by a superior power, from regard to the entreaties of a disarmed suppliant, was rather an unheardof, than a rare, occurrence, ) yet the melancholy certainty
came as a blow upon them all. Their heads involuntarily
VII.] THE BETROTHED. 105
drooped, but anger quickly prevailed over depression in
Renzo's mind. The announcement found him already
wounded and irritated by a succession of painful surprises, fallacious attempts, and disappointed hopes, and,
above all, exasperated at this moment by the repulses of Lucia.
' I should like to know, ' said he, gnashing his teeth
and raising his voice as he had never before done in the presence of Father Cristoforo ; ' I should like to know
what reasons this dog gives for asserting . for asserting that my bride should not be my bride.'
6
•
Poor Renzo ! ' replied the friar, with a look and accent
of pity that kindly recommended peaceableness ; if the
powerful, who do such deeds of injustice, were always
obliged to give their reasons, things would not be as
they are.'
'Did the dog then say that he would not, because he would not ?'
' He didn't even say that, my poor fellow ! It would
be something, if, to commit iniquity, they were obliged openly to confess it. '
6
But he must have told you something ; what did this infernal firebrand say ? '
' I heard his words, but I cannot repeat them to you.
The words of a powerful wicked man are violent, but
contradictory. He can be angry that you are suspicious
of him, and at the same time make you feel that your
suspicions are well- founded ; he can insult you, and call himself offended ; ridicule you, and ask your opinion ;
threaten, and complain ; be insolent, and irreprehensible.
Ask no more. He neither mentioned the name of this
innocent, nor your own ; he did not even appear to know you, nor did he say he designed anything ; but .... but I understood too well that he is immoveable. However,
confidence in God, you poor creatures ! ' turning to Agnese
and Lucia, ' don't give up in despair ! And you, Renzo oh ! believe me, I can put myself in your place ; I
can feel what passes in your heart. But, patience ; it is
a poor word, a bitter one to those who have no faith ;
you-will you not allow God one day, two days, or whatbut
106 [ CH. I PROMESSI SPOSI.
ever time He may please to take to clear you and give you
justice ? The time is His ; and He has promised us much. Leave Him to work, Renzo ; and .... believe
me, I already have a clue that may lead to something for
your help. I cannot tell you more at present. To-morrow I shall not come here ; I must be at the convent all
day, for you. You, Renzo, try to come to me ; or if, by
any unforeseen accident, you cannot, send a trustworthy man, or a lad of discretion, by whom I may let you know
what may happen. It grows dark ; I shall have to make
haste to reach the convent. Faith, courage, and good
night.'
Having said this, he hastily left them, and made his
way rapidly along a crooked, stony by-path, that he might not be late at the convent, and run the risk of a severe
reprimand, or, what would have grieved him more, the infliction of a penance, which might have disabled him on the morrow for any undertaking which the service of
his protégés might require.
' Did you hear what he said about .... I don't know
what .... about a clue that he held in his hand to help us ? ' said Lucia. It is best to trust in him ; he is a
man who, if he promises ten .
·
. . . .
>
I know there is not his like,' interrupted Agnese ;
'but he ought to have spoken more clearly, or, at least,
taken me aside and told me what it was.'
C
Idle prating ! I'll put an end to it, that I will ! '
interrupted Renzo, in his turn, as he paced furiously up
and down the room, with a look and tone that left no
doubt as to the meaning of his words.
C
Oh, Renzo ! ' exclaimed Lucia.
' What do you mean ? ' cried Agnese.
"Whyneed I tell you ? I'll put an end to it ! Though
he has a hundred, a thousand devils in his soul, he's flesh
and blood, after all.'
' No, no! for Heaven's sake ! .... began Lucia, but tears choked her utterance.
This is not proper language, even in jest,' replied
Agnese.
6
In jest ! ' cried Renzo, planting himself directly before
VII.]
THE BETROTHED. 107
Agnese, as she sat, and fixing on her two fearful-looking
eyes. ' In jest ! you shall see whether I am in jest or not. '
' Ah, Renzo ! ' said Lucia, scarcely able to articulate
for sobs, ' I never saw you so before. '
' Don't talk so, for Heaven's sake ! ' replied Agnese,
hastily, lowering her voice. ' Don't you remember how
many arms he has at his bidding ? And then, there is always justice to be had against the poor . God defend them !'
...
' I will get justice for myself, I will ! It is time now.
The thing isn't easy, I know. The ruffian is well defended, dog that he is ! I know how it is ; but never
mind. Patience and resolution . . . . and the time will
soon arrive. Yes, I will get justice . I'll free the
country, and people will bless me ! And then in four bounds "
The horror of Lucia at these explicit declarations
repressed her sobs, and inspired her with courage to
speak. Raising from her hands her face bathed in tears,
she addressed Renzo in a mournful, but resolute tone :
' You no longer care, then, about having me for your
wife ? I promised myself to a youth who had the fear of
God ; but a man who has .... were he safe from all
justice and vengeance, were he the son of a king . . . .'
" Very well ! ' cried Renzo, his face more than ever
convulsed with fury ; ' I won't have you, then ; but he
sha'n't either. I will be here without you, and he in the abode of ....
' Ah, no, for pity's sake, don't say so ; don't look so
furious ! No, no, I cannot bear to see you thus,' exclaimed Lucia, weeping, and joining her hands in an
attitude of earnest supplication ; while Agnese repeatedly called him by name, and seized hold of his shoulders,
his arms, and his hands, to pacify him. He stood immoveable, thoughtful, almost overcome at the sight of
Lucia's imploring countenance ; then suddenly gazed at
her sternly, drew back, stretched out his arm, and pointing with his finger towards her, burst forth : ' Her ! yes,
he wants her ! He must die !'
108 [ CH.
I PROMESSI SPOSI.
' And I, what harm have I done you, that you should
kill me? ' said Lucia, throwing herself on her knees.
' You! ' said he, with a voice expressive of anger,
though of a far different nature ; ' you ! what good do
youwish me? What proof have you given me ? Haven't
I begged, and begged, and begged ? .... Have I been able to obtain ...
' Yes, yes, ' replied she, precipitately ; ' I will go to the Curate's to-morrow ; I will go now, if you like. Only
be yourself again, I will go. '
You promise me ? ' said Renzo, his voice and expression rendered in an instant more human.
I promise you. '
You have promised me ?'
Thanks be to Thee, O Lord ! ' exclaimed Agnese,
doubly satisfied .
Did Renzo, in the midst of his anger, discern the
advantage that might be taken of Lucia's terror ? And
did he not practise a little artifice to increase it, that he
might use this advantage ? Our author protests he
knows nothing about the matter ; nor, I think, did even
Renzo himself know very well. At any rate, he was undoubtedly enraged beyond measure with Don Rodrigo,
and ardently desired Lucia's consent ; and when two
powerful passions struggle together in a man's mind, no
one, not even the most patient, can always clearly discern
one voice from the other, or say, with certainty, which of
them predominates.
'I have promised you, ' replied Lucia, with an accent
of timid and affectionate reproof; but you have also
promised not to make any disturbance-to submit your- self to Father . . . .'
"
Come, now, for whose sake did I get into a passion ?
Do you want to draw back ? And will you oblige me to
do a rash thing ? '
' No, no,' said Lucia, ready to relapse into her former fears. ' I have promised, and I will not draw back.
But see how you have made me promise ; God forbid that ..
VII.] THE BETROTHED. 109
'Why will you prophesy evil, Lucia ? God knows we
do no wrong to anybody.'
' Promise me, at least, this shall be the last time."
' I promise you, upon my word.'
' But this once you will stand by him, ' said Agnese.
Here the author confesses his ignorance of another
matter, and that is, whether Lucia was absolutely, and
on every account, dissatisfied at being obliged to give her consent. We follow his example, and leave the point
undecided.
Renzo would willingly have prolonged the conversation,
and allotted their several parts in the proceedings of the
morrow; but it was already dark, and the women wished
him good night, as they thought it scarcely decorous that
he should remain any longer with them at so late an hour.
The night was passed by all three as well as could be
expected, considering that it followed a day of such excitement and misfortune, and preceded one fixed_upon
for an important undertaking of doubtful issue. Renzo
made his appearance early next morning, and concerted
with the women, or rather with Agnese, the grand operations of the evening, alternately suggesting and removing
difficulties, foreseeing obstacles, and both beginning, by
turns, to describe the scene as if they were relating a
past event. Lucia listened ; and, without approving in
words what she could not agree to in her heart, promised
to do as well as she was able.
' Are you going down to the convent to see Father
Cristoforo, as he bid you, last night ? ' said Agnese to Renzo.
' Not I,' replied he ; ' you know what discerning eyes
the Father has ; he will read in my looks, as if it were
written in a book, that there's something in the wind;
and if he begins to question me, I can't get off it easily.
And, besides, I must stay here to arrange matters. It
will be better for you to send somebody. '
' I will send Menico.'
' Very well, ' replied Renzo ; and he set off to arrange
matters, as he had said.
110 [ CH.
I PROMESSI SPOSI.
Agnese went to a neighbouring cottage to ask for
Menico, a sprightly and very sensible lad for his age,
who, through the medium of cousins and sisters- in-law,
came to be a sort of nephew to the dame. She asked his
parents for him, as for a loan, and begged she might
keep him the whole day, ' for a particular service,' said
she. Having obtained permission, she led him to her
kitchen, gave him his breakfast, and bid him go to Pescarenico, and present himself to Father Cristoforo, who
would send him back with a message at the right time.
' Father Cristoforo, that fine old man, you know, with a
white beard, who is called the Saint . ...
' I understand, ' said Menico ; he who speaks so
kindly to the children, and sometimes gives them pic- tures.'
' Just so, Menico. And if he bids you wait some time
at the convent, don't wander away ; and be sure you
don't go with other boys to the lake to throw stones into
the water, nor to watch them fish, nor to play with the
nets hung up to dry, nor . . . .'
C
6
Poh, aunt ; I am no longer a child. '
Well, be prudent ; and when you come back with the answer .... look ; these two fine newparpagliole are for
you. '
Give me them now,
that . ...
' No, no, you will play with them. Go, and behave
well, that you may have some more. '
In the course of this long morning many strange
things happened, which roused not a little suspicion in the already-disturbed minds of Agnese and Lucia. A
beggar, neither thin nor ragged, as they generally were,
and of somewhat dark and sinister aspect, came and
asked alms, in God's name, at the same time looking
narrowly around. A piece of bread was given him,
which he received, and placed in his basket, with ill- dissembled indifference. He then loitered, and made
many inquiries, with a mixed air of impudence and hesitation, to which Agnese endeavoured to make replies
exactly contrary to the truth. When about to depart,
he pretended to mistake the door, and went to that at
VII.]
THE BETROTHED. 111
the foot of the stairs, glancing hastily upwards, as well
as he could. On their calling him back- Hey ! hey!
where are you going, my good man ?-this way! ' he
turned and went out by the door that was pointed out
to him, excusing himself with a submission, and an
affected humility, that ill accorded with the fierce and
hard features of his face. After his departure, they continued to mark, from time to time, other suspicious and
strange figures . It was not easy to discern what kind
of men they were ; yet still they could not believe them
to be the unpretending passers-by they wished to appear.
One would enter under pretence of asking the way
others, arriving at the door, slackened their pace, and
peeped through the little yard into the room, as if wishing to see without exciting suspicion. At last, towards
noon, these annoying and alarming appearances ceased.
Agnese got up occasionally, and crossed the little yard.
to the street-door, to reconnoitre ; and after looking
anxiously around on either side, returned with the intelligence, ' There's nobody ; ' words which she uttered
with pleasure, and Lucia heard with satisfaction, neither
one nor the other knowing exactly the reason why. But
an undefined disquietude haunted their steps, and, with
Lucia especially, in some degree cooled the courage they
had summoned up for the proceedings of the evening.
The reader, however, must be told something more
definite about these mysterious wanderers ; and to relate
it in order, we must turn back a step or two, and find
Don Rodrigo, whom we left yesterday after dinner by
himself, in one of the rooms of his palace, after the departure of Father Cristoforo.
Don Rodrigo, as we have said, paced backwards and
forwards with long strides in this spacious apartment,
surrounded on all sides by the family portraits of many
generations. When he reached the wall and turned
round, his eye rested upon the figure of one of his warlike ancestors, the terror of his enemies, and of his own
soldiers ; who, with a stern grim countenance, his short
hair standing erect from his forehead, his large sharp
whiskers covering his cheeks, and his hooked chin, stood
112 I PROMESSI SPOSI [CH. .
like a warrior, clothed in a complete suit of steel armour,
with his right hand pressing his side, and the left grasping the hilt of his sword. Don Rodrigo gazed upon it,
and when he arrived beneath it, and turned back, beheld before him another of his forefathers, a magistrate, and
the terror of litigants, seated in a high chair, covered
with crimson velvet, enveloped in an ample black robe,
so that he was entirely black, excepting for a white collar,
with two large bands, and a lining of sable, turned wrong
side outwards, (this was the distinctive mark of senators,
but only worn in winter ; for which reason the picture of
a senator in summer-clothing is never met with,) squalid,
and frowning; he held in his handa memorial, and seemed
to be saying, ' We shall see. ' On the one hand was a
matron, the terror of her maids ; on the other, an abbot,
the terror of his monks ; in short, they were all persons
who had been objects of terror while alive, and who now
inspired dread by their likenesses. In the presence of
such remembrancers, Don Rodrigo became enraged and ashamed, as he reflected that a friar had dared to come to
him with the parable of Nathan ; and his mind could find no peace. He would form a plan of revenge, and
then abandon it ; seek how, at the same time, to satisfy
his passion, and what he called his honour ; and sometimes, hearing the beginning of the prophecy resounding
in his ears, he would involuntarily shudder, and be almost
inclined to give up the idea of the two satisfactions. At
last, for the sake of doing something, he called a servant,
and desired him to make an apology for him to the company, and to say that he was detained by urgent business.
The servant returned with the intelligence that the gentlemen, having left their compliments, had taken their leave.
And Count Attilio ? ' asked Don Rodrigo, still pacing the room.
'He left with the gentlemen, illustrious Signor. '
' Very well ; six followers to accompany me-quickly !
my sword, cloak, and hat, immediately ! '
The servant replied by a bow, and withdrew, returning
shortly with a rich sword, which his master buckled on, a
VII.]
THE BETROTHED. 113
cloak which he threw over his shoulders, and a hat, ornamented with lofty plumes, which he placed on his head,
and fastened with a haughty air. Hethen moved forward,
and found the six bravoes at the door, completely armed,
who, making way for him, with a low bow, followed as
his train. More surly, more haughty, and more super- cilious than usual, he left his palace, and took the way
towards Lecco, amidst the salutations and profound bows
of the peasants he happened to meet ; and the ill- mannered wight who would have ventured to pass without taking off his hat, might consider he had purchased the exemption at a cheap rate, had the bravoes in the train
been contented merely to enforce respect by a blow on the head. To these salutations Don Rodrigo made no
acknowledgment; but to men of higher rank, though still
indisputably inferior to his own, he replied with constrained courtesy. He did not chance this time, but
when he did happen to meet with the Spanish Signor, the Governor of the Castle, the salutations were equally
profound on both sides ; it was like the meeting of two
potentates, who have nothing to share between them, yet,
for convenience sake, pay respect to each other's rank.
To pass away the time, and, by the sight of far different
faces and behaviour, to banish the image of the friar,
which continually haunted his mind, Don Rodrigo entered
a house where a large party was assembled, and where he was received with that officious and respectful cordiality
reserved for those who are greatly courted, and greatly
feared. Late at night he returned to his own palace, and
found that Count Attilio had just arrived ; and they sat
down to supper together, Don Rodrigo buried in thought,
and very silent.
6
Cousin, when will you pay your wager ? ' asked Count
Attilio, in a malicious, and at the same time rallying,
tone, as soon as the table was cleared, and the servants
had departed.
' St Martin has not yet passed.'
'Well, remember you will have to pay it soon ; for all
the saints in the calendar will pass before . . . . '
This has to be seen yet.'
I
114 [CH.
I PROMESSI SPOSI.
'Cousin, you want to play the politician ; but I under- stand all ; and I am so certain of having won my wager,
that I am ready to lay another. '
6
What?'
That the Father .... the Father ... I mean, in
short, that this friar has converted you. '
<
' It is a mere fancy ofyour own.'
Converted, cousin ; converted, I say. I, for my part,
am delighted at it. What a fine sight it will be to see you quite penitent, with downcast eyes ! And what
triumph for this Father ! Howproudly he must have re- turned to the convent ! You are not such fish as they catch every day, nor in every net. You may be sure they
will bring you forward as an example ; and when they go on a mission to some little distance, they will talk of your
acts . I can fancy I hear them.' And, speaking through
his nose, accompanying the words with caricatured ges- tures, he continued, in a sermon- like tone, In a certain
part of the world, which from motives of high respect we
forbear to name, there lived, my dear hearers, and there
still lives, a dissolute gentleman, the friend of women
rather than of good men, who, accustomed to make no distinctions, had set his eyes upon ... ,,,
666
'That will do .... enough, ' interrupted Don Rodrigo,
half amused and half annoyed : ' If you wish to repeat
the wager, I am ready, too.'
' Indeed ! perhaps, then, you have converted the Father ? '
' Don't talk to me about him : and as to the bet, Saint
Martin will decide. ' The curiosity of the Count was
aroused ; he put numberless questions, but Don Rodrigo
contrived to evade them all, referring everything to the
day of decision, and unwilling to communicate designs
which were neither begun nor absolutely determined
upon.
The Next morning, Don Rodrigo was himself again.
slight compunction that a day will come ' had awakened
in his mind, had vanished with the dreams of the night ;.
and nothing remained but a feeling of deep indignation,
rendered more vivid by remorse for his passing weakness.
VII.] THE BETROTHED.
115
The remembrance of his late almost-triumphant walk, of
the profound salutations, and the receptions he had met
with, together with the rallying of his cousin, had contributed not a little to renew his former spirit . Hardly
risen, he sent for Griso. -Something important, thought
the servant to whom the order was given ; for the man
who bore this assumed name was no less a personage than
the head of the bravoes, to whom the boldest and most
dangerous enterprises were confided , who was the most
trusted by his master, and was devoted to him, at all risks,
by gratitude and interest. Guilty of murder, he had
sought the protection of Don Rodrigo, to escape the pursuit of justice ; and he, by taking him into his service,
had sheltered him from the reach of persecution. Here,
by engaging in every crime that was required of him, he
was secured from the punishment of the first fault. To
Don Rodrigo the acquisition had been of no small importance ; for this Griso, besides being undoubtedly the
most courageous of the household, was also a specimen of what his master had been able to attempt with impunity
against the laws ; so that Don Rodrigo's power was
aggrandized both in reality and in common opinion.
Griso ! ' said Don Rodrigo, ' in this emergency it will
be seen what you are worth. Before to-morrow, Lucia
must be in this palace.'
' It shall never be said that Griso shrank from the
command of his noble protector.'
Take as many men as you want, dispose and order
them as you think best, only let the thing succeed well.
But, above all, be sure you do her no harm.'
6
Signor, a little fright, that she may not make too much noise .... one cannot do less .'
' Fear . . . . I see . . . . is inevitable. But don't you
touch a hair of her head ; and, above all, treat her with
the greatest respect. Do you understand ? '
' Signor, I could not pluck a flower from its stalk, and
bring it to your lordship, without touching it a little .
But I will do no more than is necessary. '
6 Beware you do not. And . . . . how will you manage ?'
' I was thinking, Signor. It is fortunate that the
116 I PROMESSI SPOSI [CH. .
house is at the end of the village. We shall want a place
to conceal ourselves in ; and at a little distance there's
that uninhabited building in the middle of the fields, that
house .... but your lordship knows nothing of these
things . a house that was burnt down a few years
ago ; and there have been no funds to rebuild it, so it is
forsaken, and is haunted by witches ; but it is not Saturday, and I don't care for them. The villagers are so
superstitious, they wouldn't enter it any night of the
week for a treasure, so we may safely dispose ourselves
there, without any fear of being disturbed in our plans. '
'Very good : and what then ? '
Here Griso went on to propose, and Don Rodrigo to
discuss, till they had, together, concerted a way to bring
the enterprise to an end without a trace of its authors remaining. They even contrived means to turn all the
suspicions, by making false indications, upon another
quarter ; to impose silence upon poor Agnese ; to inspire
Renzo with such fear as would overbalance his grief, efface
the thought of having recourse to the law, and even the
wish to complain ; and arranged all the other minor villanies necessary to the success of this principal one.
We
will omit the account of these consultations, however,
because, as the reader will perceive, they are not necessary
to the comprehension of the story, and it will only be
tedious, both to him and us, to entertain ourselves for
any length of time with the discussions of these two
detestable villains. It will suffice to say that, as Griso
was on the point of leaving the room, to go about the
execution of his undertaking at once, Don Rodrigo
called him back, and said, ' Listen : if by any chance
this rash clown should molest you to-night, it would not
be amiss if you were to give him something to remember,
on his shoulders, by way of anticipation. By this means,
the command to keep quiet, which shall be intimated to
him to-morrow, will more surely take effect. But don't
go to look for him, lest you should spoil what is of more importance. Do you understand me? '
6
Leave it to me, ' replied Griso, bowing with an obsequious and ostentatious air, as he departed.
VII.] THE BETROTHED. 117
The morning was spent in reconnoitering the neighbourhood. The feigned beggar who had intruded himself
so pertinaciously into Agnese's humble cottage, was no
other than Griso, who had come to get an idea of the plan
of the house by sight ; the pretended passengers were his
vile followers, who, operating under his orders, required a less minute acquaintance with the place. Their observations being made, they withdrew from notice, lest they should excite too much suspicion.
When they returned to the palace, Griso made his
report, arranged definitely the plan of the enterprise, assigned to each his different part, and gave his instructions.
All this could not be transacted without the old servant's
observation, who, with his eyes and ears constantly on
the alert, discovered that they were plotting some great
undertaking. By dint of watching and questioning, getting half a hint here, and another half there, commenting
in his own mind on ambiguous inferences, and interpreting
mysterious departures, he at length came to a pretty clear
knowledge of all the designs of the evening. But when
he was assured of them, it was very near the time, and
already a small detachment of bravoes had left the palace,
and set off to conceal themselves in the ruined building.
The poor old man, although he well knewwhat a dangerous game he was playing, and feared, besides, that he
was doing no efficient service, yet failed not to fulfil his
engagement. He went out, under pretence of taking the
air, and proceeded in great haste to the convent, to give
Father Cristoforo the promised information. Shortly
afterwards, a second party of bravoes were sent out, one
or two at a time, that they might not appear to be one
company. Griso made up the rear, and then nothing remained behind but a litter, which was to be brought to
the place of rendezvous after dark. When they were all
assembled there, Griso despatched three of them to the
inn in the village ; one was to place himself at the door,
to watch the movements in the street, and to give notice
when all the inhabitants had retired to rest ; the other
two were to remain inside, gaming and drinking, as if enjoying themselves, but were also to be on the look- out, if
118 [CH. I PROMESSI SPOSI.
anything was to be seen. Griso, with the body of the
troop, waited in ambuscade till the time of action should arrive.
6
The poor old man was still on his way, the three scouts
had arrived at their post, and the sun was setting, when
Renzo entered the cottage, and said to the women, Tonio
and Gervase are here outside : I am going with them to
sup at the inn ; and at the sound of the Ave- Maria, we
will come to fetch you. Come, Lucia, courage ; all depends upon a moment. ' Lucia sighed, and replied, ' Oh yes, courage ! ' with a tone that belied her words.
When Renzo and his two companions reached the inn,
they found the bravo already there on the watch, leaning
with his back against one of the jambs of the doorway, so
as to occupy half its width, his arms folded across his
breast, and glancing with a prying look to the right and
left, showing alternately the blacks and whites of two
griffin-like eyes. A flat cap of crimson velvet, put on
sideways, covered half the lock of hair which, parted on a
dark forehead, terminated in tresses confined by a comb at the back of the head . He held in one hand a short
cudgel ; his weapons, properly speaking, were not visible,
but one had only to look at his face, and even a child
would have guessed that he had as many under his clothes as he could carry. When Renzo, the foremost of the
three, approached him and seemed prepared to enter, the
bravo fixed his eyes upon him, without attempting to make way ; but the youth, intent on avoiding any questions or disputes, as people generally are who have an
intricate undertaking in hand, did not even stop to say
' make room ; ' but grazing the other door- post, pushed,
side-foremost, through the opening left by this Caryatides.
His companions were obliged to practise the same manoeuvre, if they wished to enter. When they got in, they
saw the others whose voices they had heard outside, sitting
at a table, playing at Mora, * both exclaiming at once, and
alternately pouring out something to drink from a large
flask placed between them. They fixed their eyes steadily
on the new comers ; and one of them, especially, holding
* See Note at end of Chapter.
VII. ]
THE BETROTHED. 119
his right hand extended in the air, with three enormous
fingers just shot forth, and his mouth formed to utter the
word ' six, ' which burst forth at the moment, eyed Renzo
from head to foot, and glanced first at his companion, and
then at the one at the door, who replied with a nod of
his head. Renzo, suspicious and doubtful, looked at his
friends, as if seeking in their countenances an interpretation of all these gestures ; but their countenances indicated nothing beyond a good appetite. The landlord approached to receive his orders, and Renzo made him
accompany him into an adjoining room, and ordered some
supper.
Who are those strangers ? ' asked he, in a low voice,
when his host returned with a coarse table- cloth under
his arm, and a bottle in his hand.
' I don't know them, ' replied the host, spreading the
table-cloth.
'What! none of them?
6
' You know, ' replied he, again smoothing the cloth on
the table with both his hands, that the first rule of our
business is not to pry into other people's affairs ; so that
even our women are not inquisitive. It would be hard
work, with the multitude of folk that come and go ; always like a harbour-when the times are good, I mean ;
but let us cheer up now, for there may come better days.
All we care for is whether our customers are honest fellows ; who they are or are not, beyond that, is nothing to us. But, come ! I will bring you a dish of hash, the like
ofwhich you've never tasted.'
' How do you know .... ? ' Renzo was beginning ; but
the landlord, already on his way to the kitchen, paid no attention to his inquiry. Here, while he was taking up
the stewing-pan in which was the above-mentioned hash,
the bravo who had eyed our youth so closely accosted
the host, and said, in an under- tone, ' Who are those good men ? '
' Worthy people of the village, ' replied he, pouring the hash into the dish.
' Very well ; but what are they called ? Who are
they ?' insisted he, in a sharp tone.
120 [CH.
I PROMESSI SPOSI.
' One is called Renzo,' replied the host, speaking in
a low voice ; ' a worthy youth reckoned-a silk weaver,
who understands his business well. The other is a
peasant of the name of Tonio, a good jovial comrade ;
pity he has so little ; he'd spend it all here. The third
is a simpleton, who eats willingly whatever is set before
him. By your leave.'
With these words and a slight bow, he passed between
the stove and the interrogator, and carried the dish into the next room. ' How do you know, ' resumed Renzo,
when he saw him reappear, that they are honest men,
if you don't know them ? '
By their actions, my good fellow-men are known
by their actions. Those who drink wine without criticizing it ; who show the face of the King upon the
counter without prating ; who don't quarrel with other
customers ; and if they owe a blowto any one, go outside and away from the inn to give it, so that the poor
landlord isn't brought into the scrape :-these are honest
men. However, if one could know everybody to be
honest, as we four know one another, it would be better.
But why are you so inquisitive on these matters, when
you are a bridegroom, and ought to have other things in
your head? and with this hash before you, enough to
make the dead rise again ? ' So saying, he returned to the kitchen.
Our author, remarking upon the different manner in
which the landlord satisfied these various inquiries, says
he was one who in words made great professions of
friendship for honest men in general, but who in practice
paid much more attention to those who had the character
and appearance of knaves. He was, as every one must
perceive, a man of singular character.
The supper was not very blithesome. The two invited
guests would have deliberately enjoyed the unusual
gratification, but the inviter, pre- occupied by-the reader
knows what-anxious, and uneasy at the strange behaviour of these incognitos, was impatient for the time of
departure. He spoke in an under-tone, out of respect
to the strangers, and in broken and hurried words.
VII.]
THE BETROTHED. 121
' What a fine thing,' suddenly exclaimed Gervase,
' that Renzo wants to marry, and is obliged . . .. !"
Renzo gave him a savage look, and Tonio exclaimed,
'Hold your tongue, simpleton ! ' accompanying the
epithet with a knock of his elbow. The conversation
flagged till the end of the meal. Renzo, observing the
strictest sobriety, managed to help his guests with so
much discretion as to inspire them with sufficient boldness, without making them giddy and bewildered. Supper being over, and the bill having been paid by the one
who had done the least execution, they had again to
pass under the scrutinizing eyes of the three bravoes,
who gazed earnestly at Renzo, as they had done on his
entrance. When he had proceeded a few paces fromthe
inn, he looked round, and saw that he was followed
by the two bravoes whom he had left sitting in the
kitchen ; so he stood still with his companions, as much as to say, ' Let us see what these fellows want with me.
On perceiving, however, that they were observed, they
also stopped short, and speaking to each other in a sup- pressed voice, turned back again. Had Renzo been near
enough to have heard their words, the following would
have struck him as very strange : ' It will be a fine thing,
however, without counting the drinking-money,' said one
of the villains, ' if we can relate, on our return to the
palace, that we made them lay down their arms in a
hurry;-by ourselves, too, without Signor Griso here to
give orders ! '
And spoil the principal business ! ' replied the other.
See, they've discovered something ; they are stopping to look at us. Oh, I wish it was later ! Let us turn
back, or they'll surely suspect us ! Don't you see people
are coming in every direction ? Let us wait till they've
all gone to bed.'
There was, in fact, that stirring-that confused buzz
-which is usually heard in a village on the approach of
evening, and which shortly afterwards gives place to the
solemn stillness of night. Women arrived from the
fields, carrying their infants on their backs, and holding
by the hand the elder children, whom they were hearing
122 [CH.
I PROMESSI SPOSI.
repeat their evening prayers ; while the men bore on
their shoulders their spades, and different implements
of husbandry. On the opening of the cottage doors, a
bright gleam of light sparkled from the fires, that were
kindled to prepare their humble evening meal. In the
street might be heard salutations exchanged, together
with brief and sad remarks on the scarcity of the harvest,
and the poverty of the times ; while, above all, resounded
the measured and sonorous tolls of the bell, which
announced the close of day. When Renzo saw that his
two indiscreet followers had retired, he continued his
way amid the increasing darkness, occasionally, in a low
tone, refreshing the memories of one or other of the
brothers on some point of their duties they might be
likely to forget. When he arrived at Lucia's cottage,
the night had quite closed in.
'Between the acting of a dreadful thing,'
says a foreign writer, who was not wanting in discernment,
' And the first motion, all the interim is Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream.'
Lucia had suffered for several hours the horrors of such
a dream ; and Agnese-Agnese herself, the author of
the design, was buried in thought, and could scarcely
find words to encourage her daughter. But, at the
moment of awaking at the moment when one is called
upon to begin the dreaded undertaking, the mind is
instantly transformed. A new terror and a new courage succeed those which before struggled within ; the enterprise presents itself to the mind like a fresh apparition ; that which, at first sight, was most dreaded, seems
sometimes rendered easy in a moment ; and, on the
other hand, an obstacle which, at first, was scarcely
noticed, becomes formidable ; the imagination shrinks
back alarmed, the limbs refuse to fulfil their office,
and the heart revokes the promises that were made with
the greatest confidence. At Renzo's smothered knock,
Lucia was seized with such terror, that, at the moment,
VII.]
THE BETROTHED. 123
she resolved to suffer anything, to be separated from him for ever, rather than execute the resolutions she had
made ; but when he had stood before her, and had said,
'Here I am, let us go ' -when all were ready to accompany him without hesitation, as a fixed and irrevocable
thing, Lucia had neither time nor heart to interpose
difficulties ; and, almost dragged along, she tremblingly
took one arm of her mother, and one of her betrothed,
and set off with the venturesome party.
Very softly, in the dark, and with slow steps, they
passed the threshold, and took the road that led out
of the village. The shortest way would have been to
have gone through it, to reach Don Abbondio's house, at
the other end ; but they chose the longer course, as being
the most retired. After passing along little narrow roads
that ran between gardens and fields, they arrived near
the house, and here they divided . The two lovers re- mained hidden behind a corner of the building ; Agnese
was with them, but stood a little forwarder, that she
might be able to run in time to meet Perpetua, and take
possession ofher. Tonio, with his blockhead of a brother,
Gervase, who knew how to do nothing by himself, and
without whom nothing could be done, hastened boldly forward, and knocked at the door.
' Who's there, at such an hour ? ' cried a voice from a
window, that was thrown open at the moment : it was the voice of Perpetua. ' There's nobody ill , that I know of.
But, perhaps, some accident has happened ? '
' It is I, ' replied Tonio, ' with my brother ; we want to
speak to the Signor Curate.'
' Is this an hour for Christians ? ' replied Perpetua,
sharply. ' You've no consideration. Come again to- morrow. '
Listen ; I'll come again, or not, just as you like ; I've
scraped together nobody knows how much money, and
came to settle that little debt you know of. Here, I had
five-and-twenty fine new berlinghe ; but if one cannot
pay, never mind ; I know well enough how to spend
these, and I'll come again, when I've got together some more.'
124 I PROMESSI SPOSI. [CH.
"Wait, wait ! I'll go, and be back in a moment. But
why come at such an hour ? '
" If you can change the hour, I've no objection ; as for
me, here I am ; and if you don't want me, I'll go . '
' No, no ; wait a moment ; I'll be back with the answer
directly. '
6
So saying, she shut the window again. At this instant,
Agnese left the lovers, and saying, in a low voice, to
Lucia, Courage ! it is but a moment ; it's only like
drawing a tooth, ' joined the two brothers at thedoor, and
began gossiping with Tonio, so that, when Perpetua should
return and see her, she might think she was just passing
by, and that Tonio had detained her for a moment.