'HISTORY may truly be defined a mighty Warfare
'against Time, forasmuch as, taking Prisoners by Force
'the Years of Time, already dead, she recalleth them to
' Life, bringeth them under Review, and re- arrangeth them
in Battle- Array. But the illustrious Champions who in
'this Arena reap a Harvest of Palms and Laurels, do use
‘ to seize only upon the most pompous and brilliant of the
' Spoils, embalming with their empurpled Fluid the Enter-
'prises of Princes and Potentates, and such- like qualified
'Personages, and embroidering with the acute Needle of
'Genius those golden and silken Threads which form an
uninterrupted Tapestry offamous Actions. Whereas to
my Feebleness it is not permitted to rise to such Argu-
'ments and perilous Sublimities, ranging among the
' Labyrinths ofpolitical Factions, and the warlike Clang of
'brazen Trumpets : but only this, that having come to the
Knowledge ofFacts worthy of Remembrance, even though
'they happened to Persons oflow Condition and ordinary
' Rank, I would address myself to the Task of leaving their
'Memory to Posterity, by giving with all Accuracy and
' Genuineness the Account, or rather Relation, of them.
C
viii INTRODUCTION.
6
·
'Wherein will be seen, on a narrow Theatre, grievous
'Tragedies of Horror, and Scenes of great Wickedness,
'interspersed with virtuous Enterprises and angelic Good-
' ness, opposed unto Satanic Operations. And in good
Truth, seeing that this our Country is beneath the Rule
of His Catholic Majesty, our Governor, who is that Sun
which doth never set ; and that, moreover, in Addition,
' shineth with reflected Light that Moon which never
' waneth, the Hero of Prosapia, who, for the Time present,
' occupieth his Place ; and the most noble Senators, those
'fixed Stars, and the other admirable Magistrates, who, like
' wandering Planets, diffuse the Light in all Quarters,
'herebyforming a most glorious Firmament, -other Cause
' cannot be discovered wherefore it should be transmuted
' into the dark Shadows of infernal Deeds, Wickedness, and
Cruelty, such as by rash Men are multiplied, except it
come to pass by diabolical Art and Plottings, since human
' Malice alone could never suffice to resist so great a Force
'of Heroes, who, with the Eyes of Argus, and Limbs of
Briareus, deal with the public Wealth. Wherefore,
describing these Events which took place in the Times of
my still verdant Youth, notwithstanding the greater Part
'of the Persons here represented have disappeared from
'the Stage of this World, and become Tributaries to the
' Fates ; nevertheless, for worthy Reasons, Silence shall
'shroud their Names, that is, the Names oftheir Families,
' and the same shall be observed of Places, only indicating
'the Territory generaliter. Nor let any one say that this
' will be an Unperfectness in the Story, and Deformity of
' this my unpolished Production ; at least, let not such a
6
C
'
"
INTRODUCTION. ix
Critic be a person greedy ofphilosophic Repute ; for as
'to Men versed in the Stores of Philosophy, they will see C
clearly that there is
' the said Narrative.
' and denied by none,
'the merest Accidents
Nothing wanting to the Substance of
Forasmuch as, it being self- evident,
that Names are Nothing but mere-
... "
-But when I shall have undergone the heroic fatigue
of transcribing this history from this blotted and bescratched autograph, and shall have brought it, as they
say, to light, will any one be found to endure the fatigue
of reading it ?
This doubtful reflection, originating in the endeavour
to decipher a great blot which came after Accidents,
brought my copy to a stand- still, and made me reflect
more seriously upon what ought to be done. It is quite
true, said I to myself, running my eye over the manuscript, it is very true, this hailstorm of little conceits and
figures of speech, does not continue so uninterruptedly
through the work. The good man, after the fashion of
his time, was willing at first start to make a little show
of his abilities ; but afterwards, in the course of the
narration, sometimes for a long time together, the style
runs more naturally and smoothly. Yes ; but then how
commonplace he is ! how dry ! how incorrect ! Lombard
idioms without end, conversational terms introduced out
of place, grammatical rules neglected at will, sentences
awkwardly constructed. And then, sundry Spanish
elegances scattered here and there ; and then, which is
worse, in tragic or pitiful portions of the story, on every
event which excites wonder, or calls forth reflections-in
X INTRODUCTION.
all such passages, in short, as require a little eloquence,
but discreet, delicate, and in good taste, this author never
fails to indulge in something of similar character with
his exordium. And then, uniting, with wonderful talent,
the most repugnant qualities, he manages to be unpolished and affected at once, in the same page, the same
period, the same expression. Here are bombastic declamations made up by force of limping solecisms, and
throughout the whole that ambitious dulness which is
the peculiar characteristic of the writers of his country.
at that time. In very truth, it is not a production fit
to present to readers of to-day, they are too well
advised, too much disgusted with extravagances of this
kind. A fortunate escape for me, that this good thought
has suggested itself at the beginning of this unhappy
work. I wash my hands of it.
But in the very act of shutting up the rejected manuscript, to put it away again, it seemed sad to me that so
pretty a story should remain for ever unknown ; for as
to the story itself, it may appear differently to the reader,
but to me, I say, it appears very pretty. Why, thought
I, should I not take the series of facts from this manuscript, and re- cast the language ? No reasonable why
not having presented itself, this plan was embraced at
once. And nowyou have the origin of the present work,
set forth with an ingenuousness corresponding to the
importance ofthe same. Some of these facts, however—
certain customs described by our author-seemed to us
so new, so strange, to say no worse, that, before putting
faith in them, we determined to question other author-
INTRODUCTION. xi
ities. And we set ourselves the task of groping among
the records of that age, to certify ourselves whether the
world in those days really so went. This search dissipated all our doubts : at every step we stumbled on
similar events, and even more wonderful ; and, what
appeared to us most decisive, we have, in the course of
our reading, met with some personages, of whom having
never seen any notice beyond the pages of our manuscript, we had doubted whether they had ever enjoyed a
real existence. In the course of the story we cite a few
of these testimonies to gain credence for facts, from
which, on account of their strangeness, the reader might
have been most tempted to withhold it.
But having rejected as intolerable the diction of our
author, of what kind is that which we have substituted ?
Here's the point.
Whoever, without being asked, sets himself to revise
another's work, must be prepared to render a strict
account of his own, and, as it were, contracts an obligation to do so. This is a rule in fact and justice from
which we do not pretend to exempt ourselves. So much
so, that in order to conform to it with a good grace, we
had proposed to give here a minute account of the
manner of composition adopted by us ; and to this end
we went seeking, all the time the work lasted, to divine
all possible and contingent criticisms, with the intention
of answering them by anticipation. Nor would the
difficulty have lain here (since we must say this in
honour of truth) : not a single criticism occurred to us,
but there came along with it a triumphant answer ; I do
xii INTRODUCTION.
not say such an answer as resolves questions, but reverses
them. Often, too, putting two criticisms one over
against the other, we made them beat each other down ;
or, examining well their inward essence, and attentively
comparing them, we succeeded in discovering and showing
that, opposed as they were in appearance, they were
nevertheless of one genus, springing both one and other
from not perceiving the facts and principles on which a
judgment should be formed. To their great surprise, we
put them both together, and together walked them off.
Never was there an author who proved so undeniably
that he had done well. But then ! by the time we have
developed all the said objections and replies, and put
them in some order, alas ! we shall have made a book.
When we saw this, we put aside the thought for two
reasons, which the reader will certainly find convincing :
first, that to print a book to defend another, not to say
the style of another, might appear ridiculous ; secondly,
that of books, one at a time is enough, when there is no
profit in advance.